
===== PAGE 1 =====
Introduction
The tight junction forms a regulated barrier to para-
cellular transport of solutes and ions (1–3). The barri-
er contains aqueous channels capable of discriminat-
ing charge and size. Both overall electrical conductance
and specific ion selectivity differ widely among epithe-
lia. The molecular basis of these variable physiologic
properties remains poorly understood. Recently, a fam-
ily of transmembrane proteins called claudins was
identified and localized to within the tight junction (4,
5). Indirect evidence suggests claudins might create the
selective paracellular properties (6, 7). In the present
study we directly test whether overexpression of one
claudin, claudin-4, can confer ionic discrimination to
the paracellular pathway.
The 20 members of the claudin family (8) share sever-
al essential features. They are small proteins, 20–24 kDa,
with cytoplasmic amino and carboxyl termini and two
extracellular domains. The carboxyl terminus of most
claudins ends in a putative PDZ-binding domain, and
interaction of claudins 1–8 with the first PDZ domains
of the tight-junction plaque proteins ZO-1, -2, and -3 has
been demonstrated in vitro (9). The extracellular
domains (about 57 and 25 amino acids, respectively)
share regions of sequence identity, but are quite variable
in the position and number of amino acids with charged
side chains, suggesting they might have different effects
on the paracellular diffusion of ions. Freeze-fracture
micrographs reveal the barrier is formed where continu-
ous rows of transmembrane proteins from opposing
cells make adhesive contacts in the intercellular space.
These strands are composed of claudins (7, 10).
Characterization of the claudins in vivo and in cul-
tured cell models is beginning to offer functional
insights. Expression of claudin-11/OSP is concentrated
in testis and oligodendrocytes of the central nervous
system (CNS). Deletion of the claudin-11 gene in mice
results in disappearance of tight junction fibrils in testis
and male sterility, as well as delayed axonal conduction
rates in the CNS (7). Human mutations in claudin-
16/paracellin implicate this claudin in paracellular mag-
nesium reabsorption in the thick ascending loop of
Henle (6). An autosomal recessive form of deafness was
associated recently with human mutations in claudin-
14; the authors speculated that this was related to
inability to maintain the special ionic environments in
the cochlear duct (11). In Madin-Darby canine kidney
(MDCK) cells, an in vitro epithelial model, overexpres-
sion of claudin-1 increases transepithelial electrical
resistance (TER) with variable effects on mannitol flux
(12, 13). Consistent with a presumed role in creating the
tissue-specific physiologic properties, some claudins
have very restricted and different distribution patterns
among cell types and tissues (14–16).
The Journal of Clinical Investigation | May 2001 | Volume 107 | Number 10 1319
Regulated expression of claudin-4 decreases paracellular
conductance through a selective decrease 
in sodium permeability
Christina Van Itallie,1 Christoph Rahner,1 and James Melvin Anderson1,2
1Department of Internal Medicine, and
2Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA
Address correspondence to: Christina Van Itallie, Department of Internal Medicine, 1080 LMP, PO Box 208019, 
Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar St., New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8019, USA. 
Phone: (203) 785-4133; Fax: (203) 785-7273; E-mail: christina.vanitallie@yale.edu.
Received for publication February 7, 2001, and accepted in revised form April 10, 2001.
Tight junctions regulate paracellular conductance and ionic selectivity. These properties vary among
epithelia but the molecular basis of this variation remains unknown. To test whether members of the
claudin family of tight junction proteins influence paracellular ionic selectivity, we expressed human
claudin-4 in cultured MDCK cells using an inducible promoter. Overexpression increased the com-
plexity of tight junction strands visible by freeze-fracture microscopy without affecting the levels of
claudin-1, -2, or -3, occludin, or ZO-1. A decrease in conductance correlated directly with the kinetics
of claudin-4 induction. Dilution potentials revealed that the decrease in paracellular conductance
resulted from a selective decrease in Na
+ permeability without a significant effect on Cl– permeability.
Flux for an uncharged solute, mannitol, and the rank order of permeabilities for the alkali metal
cations were unchanged. A paracellular site for these effects was supported by the lack of apical/basal
directionality of the dilution potentials, the linearity of current-voltage relationships, and the lack of
influence of inhibitors of major transcellular transporters. These results provide, to our knowledge,
the first direct demonstration of the ability of a claudin to influence paracellular ion selectivity and
support a role for the claudins in creating selective channels through the tight-junction barrier.
J. Clin. Invest. 107:1319–1327 (2001).

===== PAGE 2 =====
In the present study we expressed human claudin-4
in cultured MDCK cell monolayers under an
inducible promoter and characterized changes in
junction structure and physiology. We observed that
overexpression of claudin-4 decreased paracellular
electrical conductance due to a selective decrease in
Na
+ permeability, with no significant change in the
permeability for Cl –. This is the first demonstration
that a claudin can confer ionic selectivity to paracel-
lular transport and leads to the prediction that the
combination of different claudins defines the overall
selectivity of different junctions.
Methods
Plasmid cDNA constructs . Full-length human claudin-4
was amplified by PCR using human kidney cDNA
(Quick-clone cDNA; CLONTECH Laboratories Inc.,
Palo Alto, California, USA) as a template and primer
56948 
(5′-CGGGATCCCTGACAATGGCCTCCATGGGGC-
TAC-3′), primer 56949 (5′-GCTCTAGATTACACG-
TAGTTGCTGGCAGC-3′), and Taq polymerase (Promega
Corp., Madison, Wisconsin, USA). The amplified prod-
uct was cloned into the TOPO-TA vector (Invitrogen
Corp., San Diego, California, USA) and subcloned using
EcoRI into the pTRE vector (CLONTECH Laboratories
Inc.). DNA sequence was verified in both directions.
Cell culture and generation of stable lines. Human claudin-
4 was transfected into tet-off MDCK II cells (CLON-
TECH Laboratories Inc.) along with 20-fold less
pTKhyg selection plasmid using the Lipofectamine
protocol (Life Technologies Inc., Grand Island, New
York, USA). Claudin-4–transfected clones were select-
ed in 0.2 mg/ml hygromycin B, and resistant clones
were maintained in high-glucose DMEM supplement-
ed with 10% FBS, penicillin/streptomycin, 0.1 mg/ml
hygromycin, and 50 ng/ml doxycycline. Cell lines were
screened by immunoblotting. For experiments, cells
were trypsinized and replated onto Snapwells (Corning
Inc. Life Sciences, Acton, Massachusetts, USA) at 5 ×
10
4 cells/well in doxycycline-containing (50 ng/ml) or
doxycycline-free media (high-glucose DMEM supple-
mented with penicillin/streptomycin and 10% FBS,
CLONTECH Laboratories Inc.–certified tetracycline-
free serum). Cells plated for experiments were refed
daily with the appropriate media.
Immunofluorescence microscopy. Cells were grown on fil-
ters (Transwell-Clear; Corning Inc. Life Sciences), and
all methods for immunolocalization have been
described previously (17). ZO-1 was detected with a
mouse mAb (1:300; Zymed Laboratories Inc., South
San Francisco, California, USA); claudin-4 was detect-
ed using a rabbit polyclonal Ab to human claudin-4
(1:100; Zymed Laboratories Inc.). Secondary Ab’s were
Cy3-labeled anti-mouse and Cy-2–labeled affinity-puri-
fied anti-rabbit species-specific Ab’s (Jackson
ImmunoResearch Laboratories Inc., West Grove, Penn-
sylvania, USA). All microscopy was performed on a
Nikon Microphot FX microscope using a ×60 PlanApo
lens, and images were captured using a Sensys cooled
CCD camera. Images were then processed using Open-
Lab software (Improvision Inc., Lexington, Massachu-
setts, USA) and Adobe Photoshop 5.0 (Adobe Systems
Inc., San Jose, California, USA).
Freeze-fracture electron microscopy . Freeze-fracture
analysis of uninduced and induced MDCK cells was
performed as described previously (18). Replica sets
from two separate uninduced and induced MDCK cell
clones were examined, and the freeze-fracture patterns
were similar for each.
Immunoblot analysis . To determine the expression
profiles of claudin-4–overexpressing cell lines, trans-
fected MDCK cells were plated in twelve-well dishes
on Trans-well filters. No differences in kinetics or lev-
els of protein induction were observed associated with
the plating substrate. Protein expression was induced
by doxycycline removal for 4 days; claudin-4 protein
levels were always compared with that seen in unin-
duced cells of the same clonal line. Doxycycline had
no apparent effect on cell number or cell size; endoge-
nous claudin-4 levels were unaffected by doxycycline
treatment in the parental cell line (data not shown).
Sample preparation was performed as described pre-
viously (18). When cells were grown on filters, the
entire filter was removed and placed into 100–200 µl
of sample buffer. Samples were stored at –80°C before
analysis. Equal volumes of lysate were subjected to
SDS-PAGE (13% polyacrylamide gels for claudin, 8%
gels for ZO-1 and occludin) and transferred to nitro-
cellulose. Ab’s (all from Zymed Laboratories Inc.) used
for immunoblot analysis were: claudin-1/3 (1:1000;
this lot of claudin-1 Ab cross reacts with claudin-3
and possibly claudin-20) and claudin-4 polyclonal
(1:1000) Ab’s, claudin-2 mouse mAb (1:2500), anti-
human ZO-1 mouse mAb (1:1000), and anti-human
occludin mAb (1:1000). Antigen-Ab complexes were
detected with horseradish peroxidase–conjugated
(HRP-conjugated) secondary Ab’s by enhanced chemi-
luminescence (ECL) (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech
Inc., Piscataway, New Jersey, USA).
Electrophysiologic measurements . Studies were per-
formed on cell monolayers grown on porous filters
(Snapwell; Corning Inc. Life Sciences) in modified Uss-
ing chambers (Navicyte; Harvard Apparatus Co., Hol-
liston, Massachusetts, USA) with a microcomputer-
controlled voltage/current clamp (Harvard Apparatus
Co.). Temperature was maintained at 37°C. Solution
mixing and pH were regulated by bubbling water-satu-
rated 95% O
2–5% CO2 through the chambers. Voltage
and current electrodes were Ag/AgCl electrodes with
microporous ceramic tips.
Typical experiments consisted of the following pro-
cedure. At the start of each experiment, fluid resistance
and electrode potentials were determined across blank
filters in buffer A (120 mM NaCl, 10 mM HEPES, pH
7.4, 5 mM KCl, 10 mM NaHCO
3, 1.2 mM CaCl2, 1 mM
MgSO4) (19) and subtracted from subsequent meas-
urements. Next, electrical potentials were determined
when buffer B (60 mM NaCl, 120 mM mannitol, 10
1320 The Journal of Clinical Investigation | May 2001 | Volume 107 | Number 10

===== PAGE 3 =====
mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 5 mM KCl, 10 mM NaHCO3, 1.2
mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgSO4) replaced buffer A on the api-
cal or basal side of the blank filters. Dilution potentials
measured using blank filters were subtracted from
those determined with control or induced MDCK cells.
After initial measurements were made using blank
filters, the filters were removed and replaced with
those containing confluent MDCK cell monolayers.
Filters were immediately washed twice on both the
apical and basal surfaces with buffer A at 37°C. TER
or total conductance ( G
T; 1/TER × 1000) was meas-
ured by the voltage deflection when repetitive 40- µA
current pulses were passed across the monolayer.
Base-line transmonolayer potentials were determined.
Stability of conductance and transmonolayer poten-
tial measurements were confirmed by repeated meas-
urements (every 6 seconds) for at least 1 minute. Api-
cal buffer was then aspirated and replaced (with one
wash) by warmed buffer B. Measurement of conduc-
tance and the transmonolayer potential were per-
formed immediately (every 6 seconds) and monitored
for at least 1 minute to verify stability. Filters were
then removed, and, where indicated, filters were
excised and cells extracted for immunoblot analysis.
In some cases, the effect of substituting buffer B in
the basal compartment was also determined.
Bi-ionic potentials were determined by apical substi-
tution of 120 mM NaCl with equimolar amounts of
KCl, LiCl, RbCl, or CsCl. Transmonolayer electrical
potential was measured as described above. Measure-
ments made using blank filters were subtracted from
those determined with cells.
Instantaneous current-voltage relationship was deter-
mined in solution A, stepping the voltage from 30 mV
to –30 mV in steps of 5 mV every 10 seconds. Current
was recorded every 6 seconds.
All electrophysiologic measurements were performed
on duplicate or triplicate filters; statistics were analyzed
using Instat (GraphPad Software for Science Inc., San
Diego, California, USA), and data were graphed using
either SigmaPlot or DeltaGraph.
Mannitol flux . Determination of [
3H]-mannitol flux
was carried out as described by McCarthy et al. (22) on
monolayers of uninduced or induced cells. Briefly, cells
were plated on Transwell filters (Corning Inc. Life Sci-
ences) in the presence or absence of doxycycline. After
4 days, media was replaced with fresh media (with or
without doxycycline) supplemented with 1 mM man-
nitol in both the apical and basal chambers. In addi-
tion, the apical media (0.5 ml) contained 4 µCi (1
µCi/µM) [
3H]-mannitol (Amersham Pharmacia
Biotech Inc.) at tracer levels for measurement of apical
to basolateral diffusion. At 0, 30, 60, 120, and 180 min-
utes, 100 µl of media was removed from the basal com-
partment and replaced with 100 µl of fresh media with
1 mM mannitol, with or without doxycycline. The 100-
µl samples were added to 5 ml Opti-Fluor (Packard
Instrument Co., Meriden, Connecticut, USA) and
radioactivity determined in a Wallac 1409 liquid-scin-
tillation counter. Values were corrected for dilution of
label due to sample removal.
Transcellular transport-inhibitor studies. Base-line meas-
urements were taken in buffer A on identically treated
filters containing uninduced or induced MDCK cell
The Journal of Clinical Investigation | May 2001 | Volume 107 | Number 10 1321
Figure 1
Immunoblot analysis of induction in three separate claudin-4–trans-
fected tet-off MDCK cell clones, 15, 39, and 43. Cells were cultured on
filters for 4 days in the presence (+) or absence (–) of 50 ng/ml doxy-
cycline. Multiple aliquots from the same samples were separated by
SDS-PAGE, followed by immunoblotting for (a) claudin-4, (b) claudin-
1/3, (c) claudin-2, (d) occludin, and (e) ZO-1. The claudin-4 blot is
deliberately overexposed to reveal protein expression in uninduced tet-
off cells; the lower band is due to proteolysis during sample prepara-
tion. Claudin-4 overexpression has no apparent effect on the other
measured tight-junction proteins. Presence or absence of doxycycline
has no effect on claudin-4 expression in untransfected MDCK cells.
Figure 2
Immunofluorescent colocalization of ZO-1 and claudin-4 in tet-off
claudin-4–transfected MDCK cells. Cells were plated on filters and
cultured for 4 days in the presence (a and b) or absence (c and d) of
50 ng/ml doxycycline and stained for ZO-1 (a and c) and claudin-4
(b and d). ZO-1 is narrowly focused at the apical junction, while
claudin-4 in both uninduced (b) and induced (d) MDCK cells is con-
centrated at cell-cell borders.

===== PAGE 4 =====
monolayers. Buffer A was aspirated, and fresh buffer A
containing the indicated drug concentrations was used
to wash monolayers once and then added to the apical
and basal chamber compartments. Conductance and
transmonolayer potential were measured, and the apical
buffer A was replaced (after one wash) with buffer B con-
taining the indicated drug. Transepithelial electrical
potential and conductance were determined as described
previously. The effects of addition of drugs to empty fil-
ters were also determined. Drugs used were amiloride
(0.1 mM), bumetanide (0.01 mM), and 4-acetamido-4′-
isothiocyanato-stilbene-2, 2′-disulfonic acid (SITS; 0.1
mM) (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, Missouri, USA).
Results
Induced expression of claudin-4 does not alter the levels of other
tight-junction proteins. Claudin-4 is normally detectable
in MDCK cells (23). Thus, we would ideally have intro-
duced an epitope-tagged version of claudin-4 so that its
expression and cellular location could be distinguished
from endogenous protein. However, we chose not to
use tagged constructs for specific reasons. First, we
observed (data not shown) that tagged proteins were
either not expressed or remained in an intracellular
compartment when a VSV-G tag sequence was placed
at any of three different positions in the sequence. Sec-
ond, previously published results demonstrated func-
tional differences between carboxy-terminal tagged and
untagged claudin-1 when expressed in MDCK cells
(13). Consequently, we used untagged wild-type human
claudin-4 in an inducible expression system, and all
comparisons were based on the difference within indi-
vidual clones between their uninduced and induced
states. This also eliminated the potential and signifi-
cant problem of clonal variation. Tet-off MDCK cells
were transfected with pTRE-(claudin-4), and selection
of transfected clones was performed by immunoblot
analysis of hygromycin-resistant colonies. Analysis of
40 hygromycin-resistant colonies provided 15 clones
showing strong induction of a protein of the expected
size, about 22 kDa. Five clones were chosen for further
study because they had low basal levels of claudin-4 on
immunoblots and were highly inducible.
Figure 1 shows the induction of claudin-4 after 4 days
in three representative clones. Variable levels of basal
expression are seen in each. A strong induction of
between fourfold and tenfold was reproducibly seen in all
clones at 4 days. No change in the levels of claudin-1/3
and claudin-2 were observed coincident with induction
of higher levels of claudin-4 (Figure 1, b and c). In addi-
tion, induction of claudin-4 has no obvious effect on the
levels of another transmembrane protein, occludin (Fig-
ure 1d), or a cytoplasmic protein that binds to claudins,
ZO-1 (Figure 1e). These results are similar to the lack of
effect on ZO-1 and occludin associated with overex-
pressing claudin-1 in MDCK cells (13). We conclude that
any physiologic changes associated with the overexpres-
sion of claudin-4 may be primary and not secondary to
changes in the levels of other junction proteins.
Immunolocalization of claudin-4 and freeze-fracture elec-
tron microscopy. We next used indirect immunofluores-
cence to determine the cellular localization of overex-
pressed claudin-4 (Figure 2). A significant increase in
staining at cell borders was reproducibly observed in all
clones (Figure 2, b and d). This localization was also
seen in uninduced cells and was described previously
by Sonoda et al. in untransfected MDCK cells (23). In
contrast, both of the tight-junction proteins ZO-1
(Figure 2, a and c) and occludin (not shown) were con-
centrated at the apical junction contacts. However, exis-
tence of minor lateral pools of ZO-1 and occludin
could not be ruled out using these techniques, and, in
fact, McCarthy et al. (13) demonstrated rare inclusion
of occludin within lateral claudin-1 fibrils.
We performed freeze-fracture electron microscopy to
determine whether overexpression resulted in changes
in junction strands. Two separate clonal lines for both
uninduced (21 total replicas) and induced cells (20
total replicas) were studied and showed a highly con-
sistent difference. Uninduced MDCK cells (Figure 3a)
1322 The Journal of Clinical Investigation | May 2001 | Volume 107 | Number 10
Figure 3
Freeze-fracture analysis of claudin-4–overexpressing MDCK
cells. Uninduced MDCK cells show the normal parallel tight-
junction strands with angled cross bridges (a). Induced MDCK
cells show a pattern of fibrils that is less parallel, deeper, and
more complex (b). ×38,000. Bar, 200 nm.

===== PAGE 5 =====
showed a freeze-fracture pattern typical of MDCK cells
(24), with a few parallel fibrils and angled cross bridges
oriented along the apical-lateral border. In contrast, in
the cells overexpressing claudin-4 the total content of
strands was increased, and the pattern was more elab-
orate (Figure 3b). In addition to the parallel apical
strand pattern, numerous additional strands loop
down and back up on the lateral surface of the cell.
The laterally displaced strands also formed cell-cell
contacts as determined by their continuity at P-to-E
face transitions (Figure 3b). The increase in strands
was found around the entire tight-junction belt of the
induced MDCK cells. It seems likely that at least some
of the overexpressed claudin-4 is incorporated into
these new tight-junction fibrils, and we next deter-
mined whether this might induce changes in paracel-
lular permeability.
Induction of claudin-4 increases TER . Induction of
claudin-4 for 4 days led to an increase in TER by
approximately twofold to threefold in five separate
clonal lines (three lines shown in Figure 4). Each clone
appeared to reach a reproducible maximal increase by
4 days that was approximately proportional to the over-
all increase in claudin-4 (compare with immunoblots
in Figure 1a). A control clone transfected with empty
vector showed no change in TER in response to remov-
ing doxycycline. In monolayers of low resistance, such
as these, the principal route for electrical conductance
is paracellular. Thus, the increase can be tentatively
interpreted as resulting from an increase in the para-
cellular resistance (1, 25). Others have reported a simi-
lar increase in TER in response to overexpression of
claudin-1 in MDCK cells (12, 13).
Regulated expression of claudin-4 increases TER through a
selective decrease in P
Na+ without a significant effect on P Cl–.
The increase in TER, i.e., decrease in paracellular con-
ductance, associated with overexpression of claudin-4
could result from either a nonselective simultaneous
decrease in the permeability for both cations and
anions or differential effects on one or both. The latter
outcome would imply that claudin-4 confers the abili-
ty to discriminate between Na
+ and Cl–. To discriminate
between these possibilities we measured the transep-
ithelial voltage resulting from imposition of a trans-
monolayer gradient in NaCl concentration (Table 1).
In five separate clones, overexpression of claudin-4
resulted in a highly reproducible and consistent
increase in the ratio of Cl:Na permeability and simul-
taneous decrease in overall conductance, both approx-
imately twofold (Table 1). These values were used to
calculate the individual permeabilities for Na
+ and Cl–
ions (21). While PNa+ was consistently decreased by 50%
in five separate clones, there was no statistically sig-
nificant effect on P
Cl–. The absolute value of the
observed dilution potential was independent of the
direction of the applied NaCl gradient (data not
shown), consistent with the effect resulting from a
change in ion discrimination in the paracellular and
not the transcellular pathway. In addition, control
treatment of the parental cell lines with doxycycline
resulted in no changes in dilution potentials (data not
shown). Finally, bi-ionic potential experiments demon-
strated no change in the rank order and relative values
of permeability for the other alkali metal cations (K
+ >
Na+ > Li+ = Rb+ > Cs+) in claudin-4–overexpressing cells
(1.0 > 0.88 > 0.65–0.68 > 0.32) compared with unin-
duced cells (1.0 > 0.8 > 0.58–0.60 > 0.22). Very similar
values were reported for MDCK cells previously (26).
We conclude that overexpression of claudin-4 results
in a decrease in transmonolayer electrical conductance
that is attributable to a selective discrimination
against the paracellular passage of Na
+ without a sig-
nificant influence on the permeability of Cl –. In addi-
tion, the permeability for all the alkali metal cations is
decreased, as implied by the lack of effect of claudin-4
on their permeabilities relative to Na
+.
The Journal of Clinical Investigation | May 2001 | Volume 107 | Number 10 1323
Table 1
Overexpression of claudin-4 alters transepithelial Na + conductance
across MDCK cell monolayers
Uninduced cells (+ dox) Induced cells (– dox)
∆VT (mV)A 7.00 ± 0.51 4.15 ± 0.63 E
GT (mS/cm2)B 26.37 ± 1.43 12.64 ± 1.99 E
PCl/PNaC 0.396 ± 0.033 0.601 ± 0.050 F
PNa (10–6 cm/s)D 31.09 ± 2.23 17.63 ± 2.32 G
PCl (10–6 cm/s)D 12.01 ± 0.95 9.76 ± 0.94 H
Mean ± SEM of five separate claudin-4–overexpressing MDCK cell clones; each
measurement made on duplicate wells. ADilution potential. BGT. CCalculated
using the constant field equation (20). DCalculated using the Kimizuka-Koket-
zu equation (21). EP < 0.005. FP = 0.0063. GP = 0.0102. HNot significant by
Student’s t test compared with uninduced cells.
Figure 4
Claudin-4 overexpression results in increased TER. MDCK cell clones
described in Figure 2 were plated onto Snapwell inserts and cultured
in the presence (open bars) or absence (filled bars) of 50 ng/ml doxy-
cycline for 4 days. TER was determined as described in Methods;
data represent the mean and SEM of determinations from triplicate
Snapwells. TER in claudin-4–overexpressing MDCK cells, but not in
parental tet-off cells, in the absence of doxycycline is significantly
higher (P < 0.005) than in doxycycline-treated cells. Base-line TERs
averaged about 40 Ωcm
2; after claudin-4 induction, TER was
between 100 and 200 Ωcm2.

===== PAGE 6 =====
To implicate claudin-4 more directly as the cause of
the altered paracellular permeability we attempted to
correlate conductance and dilution potential with a
range of protein expression levels by varying the doxy-
cycline levels. A representative dose-response relation-
ship is presented in Figure 5. To induce a graded
increase in claudin-4 expression, cells were plated onto
Snapwell filters and immediately placed in media con-
taining 10, 1, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001, and 0 ng/ml doxycycline
and were cultured for 4 days. Triplicate filters were used
for measurements of conductance and dilution poten-
tial, after which filter inserts were excised and extract-
ed for immunoblot analysis. The kinetics and magni-
tude of change in conductance and dilution potential
were indistinguishable and correlated directly with the
increase in expression of claudin-4. By comparison the
level of ZO-1 was unchanged (Figure 5). This direct
dose-response correlation is consistent with the con-
clusion that claudin-4 is directly responsible for the
decrease in paracellular conductance by selectively
decreasing the permeability for Na
+ ions.
Two additional approaches were used to further ver-
ify that the increase in TER resulted from an increase
in paracellular rather than transcellular resistance.
First, the current-voltage curves were observed to be lin-
ear across a wide voltage range in both uninduced and
induced cells (–30 to +30mV). The slope of the line was
increased, however, in induced cells, revealing the
increased electrical resistance. This behavior is consis-
tent with conductance through the relatively large and
less-selective aqueous spaces of the paracellular path-
way rather than through the limited capacity and high
selectivity of transmembrane carriers. As a control,
doxycycline itself had no effect on the slopes observed
in untransfected cells. Second, inhibitors of three major
transcellular pathways were added to uninduced and
induced cells to see if they altered the conductance or
dilution potential. These included amiloride,
bumetanide, and SITS to block Na
+ channels, NKCC-
cotransporters and anion exchangers, respectively (27).
The dilution potentials were not significantly altered
by these drugs in either uninduced or induced cells
(data not shown). These results are also consistent with
idea that the change in Na
+ permeability in claudin-
4–overexpressing MDCK cells is not due to changes in
the transcellular channels.
Mannitol flux is unaffected by overexpressing claudin-4 . A
decrease in the dimensions of the paracellular pathway
might also contribute to the decrease in conductance
resulting from overexpression of claudin-4. To test this
possibility we compared the unidirectional diffusion of
[
3H]-mannitol across uninduced and induced cell
monolayers. Four clones were plated in triplicate in the
presence or absence of doxycycline. After 4 days, the
flux of [
3H]-mannitol was observed to be unaffected by
induction of claudin-4 (Figure 6). Flux is influenced by
the area available for diffusion through the tight junc-
tion as well as the length and width of the lateral inter-
1324 The Journal of Clinical Investigation | May 2001 | Volume 107 | Number 10
Figure 5
Decreases in the dilution potential and conductance, in response to
doxycycline treatment, correlate with increases in claudin-4 expres-
sion. Top panel, immunoblot of cells plated on Snapwells and treat-
ed with varying doses of doxycycline (10, 1, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001, and 0
ng/ml) for 4 days. Snapwells were removed and used for electro-
physiologic measurements (lower panel); after measurement, cells
on filters were lysed, proteins separated by SDS-PAGE, and
immunoblotted for claudin-4 and ZO-1. Dilution potential (filled cir-
cles) and conductance (filled squares) were determined as described
in the Methods section.
Figure 6
Induction of claudin-4 in MDCK cells does not alter transepithelial [3H]-
mannitol flux. Cells were plated as described in the legend for Figure 1
and cultured for 4 days in the presence (open symbols) or absence
(closed symbols) of 50 ng/ml doxycycline. Circles indicate clone 15, and
triangles represent clone 39. There were no differences in mannitol flux
either between clones or with or without claudin-4 induction.

===== PAGE 7 =====
cellular space (28); the flux results suggest these dimen-
sions are not changed by overexpressing claudin-4.
Discussion
In this study we begin to address the question of whether
members of the claudin family confer ionic selectivity to
the paracellular pathway. We observed that overexpres-
sion of claudin-4 in MDCK cells decreases transmono-
layer conductance by decreasing paracellular Na
+ per-
meability. There is no effect on the permeability for Cl–
or flux for a noncharged solute. The close correlation
between the level of claudin-4 expression and change in
both conductance and ionic selectivity suggest it is
directly responsible for these changes. These results are
consistent with a model in which claudin-4 forms chan-
nels through the tight junction that discriminate against
Na
+ ions and are indifferent to Cl– ions. The results of bi-
ionic potential studies imply that the permeability was
also decreased proportionately for the other alkali metal
cations, K
+, Li+, Rb+, and Cs+. Although recent studies by
Inai et al. (12) and McCarthy et al. (13) showed that over-
expression of claudin-1 increased TER in MDCK cells,
the present data are the first direct evidence, to our
knowledge, that overexpression of a claudin can confer
paracellular ionic discrimination. Previous studies have
documented the varied distribution of individual
claudins (5, 14) and led to the speculation they might be
responsible for the variable electrical properties of tight
junctions in different tissues. Demonstration of the abil-
ity of claudin-4 to alter Na
+ selectivity supports this
model and is an important first step in understanding
underlying mechanisms responsible for tissue-specific
tight-junction properties.
Several lines of evidence strongly suggest claudin-4 is
affecting the paracellular pathway. First, paracellular con-
ductance greatly exceeds transcellular conductance in
MDCK cells, therefore if claudin-4 increases TER it must
do this through an effect on tight junctions (20). Second,
the number of junction strands is increased by overex-
pression of claudin-4, while the levels of several other
strand proteins are unaffected. Thus we presume the
additional strands are made predominately of claudin-4
in a position to influence the barrier characteristics of the
junction. This does not rule out the possibility that
claudin on the lateral cell surface, not assembled into
strands, can influence paracellular permeability, and this
could be tested experimentally by using osmotic gradi-
ents to shrink or swell the lateral intercellular space.
Third, the instantaneous current-voltage relationships
were linear and symmetrical in both uninduced and
induced MDCK cells. Transmembrane carriers would be
expected to have a limited capacity to conduct current
and result in a nonlinear I-V relationship. The observed
lack of saturation is consistent with the major avenue of
conductance being between the cells rather than through
membrane carriers. Finally, amiloride, bumetanide, and
SITS were used to block major transcellular ion-trans-
porting channels. Since dilution potentials in both unin-
duced and induced cells were unaffected by the presence
of these inhibitors, it is likely that the potentials were
generated by the paracellular rather than transcellular
movement of Na
+ and Cl– ions.
It should be noted that we chose to ignore any con-
tribution to the dilution potential from ions other than
Na
+ and Cl–. This is commonly done and valid to a first
approximation since the other ions are present at lower
concentrations and their transmonolayer ratios were
kept constant during imposition of the NaCl gradient.
It is possible that the other ions compete with Na
+ and
Cl– differently at the two NaCl concentrations. This
anomalous behavior would be expected to contribute
equally to the dilution potential in both uninduced
and induced cells. Thus, the increase in P
Cl/PNa
observed with overexpression of claudin-4 must reveal
a true change in the relative selectivity even if the exact
magnitudes are approximations.
Overexpressing claudin-4 does not stimulate an over-
all increase in the levels of other tight-junction compo-
nents, consistent with a previous study by McCarthy et
al. on claudin-1 (13). Notably, ZO-1 levels do not change
in the face of claudin-4 induction. One postulated role
for the ZO proteins is to scaffold the integral membrane
proteins and link them to the actin cytoskeleton (17, 29,
30). The physiologic effects of a large increase in
claudin-4 without an increase in ZO-1 suggest that
either this linkage is not required for barrier function or
that the ZO proteins or other components involved in
the linkage are not limiting. That levels of occludin and
the other claudins measured do not diminish in the face
of claudin-4 overexpression suggests that claudin-4
does not act to replace these integral membrane tight-
junction proteins, but adds to them. Since the compo-
sition of the tight junction particle is unknown, it is
impossible to predict how overexpression of claudin-4
alters the stoichiometry of claudins and occludin in the
new tight-junction strands.
Many studies have now shown dissociation between
changes in the barrier properties of electrical conduc-
tance for ions and the flux for uncharged solutes (2,
31). Transmonolayer conductance is an instantaneous
measure of ion permeability across the paracellular
pathway during imposition of an electrical field,
reflecting only the number and nature of channels at
that instant. This property varies over five orders of
magnitude among normal tissues, yet their size selec-
tivity for noncharged solutes is very similar (1). This
supports the idea that the channels discriminate on the
basis of charge but are of the same size. Mannitol is a
small, uncharged solute commonly used to probe the
size of the paracellular channels; the flux for mannitol
is normally measured over minutes to hours. Although
conductance and flux often change together when
tight-junction function is compromised, there is con-
siderable support for the idea that the barriers meas-
ured by these two methods are functionally and physi-
cally distinct. The longer times over which flux is
measured implies that if strands were labile, i.e., sepa-
rated and reformed over time, then the paracellular
The Journal of Clinical Investigation | May 2001 | Volume 107 | Number 10 1325

===== PAGE 8 =====
route available for diffusion would be different from
that measured by electrical conductance and not
dependent on claudin-based channels. A number of
recent studies document increased TER (or decreased
conductance) with either no effect on or seemingly par-
adoxical increases in mannitol flux. Examples include
EGF treatment on LLC-PK
1 cells (27), overexpression
of occludin (31, 32), overexpression of claudin-1 (13),
and RhoA activation in MDCK cells (33). The observa-
tion that overexpressing claudin-4 decreases ionic con-
ductance without altering the rate of mannitol flux is
consistent with the idea that the selectivity but not the
size of the paracellular channels has been altered.
Although a number of models have been proposed, rea-
sons for the lack of correlation between the paracellu-
lar movement of ions, water, and small nonionic
solutes like mannitol are still unclear (2).
The ion selectivity of MDCK tight junctions was first
determined nearly 25 years ago (20, 26, 34). In those
studies, MDCK cells were found to be cation selective
and the rank order of cation permeability was deter-
mined, but there were some differences among the
studies. Our results in uninduced tet-off MDCK cells
corresponded well with those published by Rabito et al.
(26), although our cells were slightly less cation selec-
tive (P
Na/PCl = 2.5 in our cells compared with PNa/PCl =
4.4). Induction of claudin-4 resulted in a specific
decrease in absolute sodium permeability and changed
the P
Na/PCl to 1.6. Although our study is the first report
in which a change in ionic selectivity can be attributed
to overexpression of a specific tight-junction protein,
there are previous reports of experimental treatments
that alter the ionic selectivity of the tight junction.
These include the effects of EGF on LLC-PK
1 cells (27)
and TNF-α (35) on CACO-2 cells, among others. One
possible explanation is that these treatments alter
claudin expression profiles in the tight junction, with
concomitant changes in paracellular permeability char-
acteristics. This form of regulation of paracellular per-
meability would then also be expected to exist in vivo.
The molecular basis by which claudin-4 influences
paracellular selectivity remains unknown. A likely possi-
bility is that claudins form selective channels in the tight
junction through their oligomerization into particles
and lateral cell-cell contacts of the particles. The variable
amino acid sequences of their extracellular domains, par-
ticularly charged side chains, might be positioned to
modify the selectivity of the channels (35). Consistent
with this model is the observation that the extracellular
sequences of claudin-16/paracellin are among the most
acidic. Indirect evidence suggests claudin-16 permits the
paracellular passage of Mg
++ and other cations (6). In
preliminary studies, we observe that overexpressing
claudin-2 in MDCK cells results in an increase in para-
cellular conductance resulting from an increase in P
Na+.
This behavior is opposite that associated with overex-
pression of claudin-4, again supporting the idea that
each claudin contributes a different channel-like prop-
erty. Since it has been demonstrated that some combi-
nations of various claudins can interact both within
strands and across cells (36–38), the combinatorial pos-
sibilities offered by all 20 claudins could easily provide
extensive physiologic variability among tissues. Until we
better understand the nature of the tight-junction par-
ticle and how it combines with partners on the opposing
cell as well as with plaque proteins, our interpretation of
the electrophysiologic data will be necessarily limited.
Acknowledgments
These studies were supported by grants from the NIH
(DK-45134, DK-34989, and DK-38979). We are also
indebted to Alan S. Fanning, Laura Mitic, Emile Boul-
paep, John Geibel, and Lukas Landmann for invaluable
discussion or technical assistance.
1. Powell, D.W. 1981. Barrier function of epithelia. Am. J. Physiol.
241:G275–G288.
2. Madara, J.L. 1998. Regulation of the movement of solutes across tight
junctions. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 60:143–159.
3. Reuss, L. 1991. Tight junction permeability to ions and water. In Tight junc-
tions. M. Cereijido, editor. CRC Press Inc. Boca Raton, Florida, USA. 49–66.
4. Furuse, M., Fujita, K., Hiiragi, T., Fujimoto, K., and Tsukita, S. 1998.
Claudin-1 and -2: novel integral membrane proteins localizing at tight junc-
tions with no sequence similarity to occludin. J. Cell. Biol.141:1539–1550.
5. Morita, K., Furuse, M., Fujimoto, K., and Tsukita, S. 1999. Claudin
multigene family encoding four-transmembrane domain protein com-
ponents of tight junction strands. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.96:511–516.
6. Simon, D.B., et al. 1999. Paracellin-1, a renal tight junction protein
required for paracellular Mg2+ resorption. Science. 285:103–106.
7. Gow, A., et al. 1999. CNS myelin and sertoli cell tight junction strands
are absent in Osp/claudin-11 null mice. Cell. 99:649–659.
8. Mitic, L.L., Van Itallie, C.M., and Anderson, J.M. 2000. Molecular physi-
ology and pathophysiology of tight junctions. I. Tight junction struc-
ture and function: lessons from mutant animals and proteins. Am. J.
Physiol. 279:G250–G254.
9. Itoh, M., et al. 1999. Direct binding of three tight junction-associated
MAGUKs, ZO-1, ZO-2, and ZO-3 with the COOH termini of claudins. J.
Cell. Biol. 147:1351–1363.
10. Furuse, M., Sasaki, H., Fujimoto, K., and Tsukita, S. 1998. A single gene
product, claudin-1 or -2, reconstitutes tight junction strands and
recruits occludin in fibroblasts. J. Cell. Biol. 143:391–401.
11. Wilcox, E.R., et al. 2001. Mutations in the gene encoding tight junction
claudin-14 cause autosomal recessive deafness DFNB29. Cell.
104:165–172.
12. Inai, T., Kobayashi, J., and Shibata, Y. 1999. Claudin-1 contributes to the
epithelial barrier function in MDCK cells. Eur. J. Cell. Biol. 78:849–855.
13. McCarthy, K.M., et al. 2000. Inducible expression of claudin-1-myc but
not occludin-VSV-G results in aberrant tight junction strand formation
in MDCK cells. J. Cell. Sci. 113:3387–3398.
14. Rahner, C., Mitic, L.L., and Anderson, J.M. 2001. Heterogeneity in expres-
sion and subcellular localization of claudin-2, 3, 4 and 5 in the rat liver,
pancreas, and gut. Gastroenterology. 120:411–422.
15. Morita, K., Sasaki, H., Furuse, M., and Tsukita, S. 1999. Endothelial
claudin: claudin-5/TMVCF constitutes tight junction strands in
endothelial cells. J. Cell. Biol. 147:185–194.
16. Morita, K., Sasaki, H., Fujimoto, K., Furuse, M., and Tsukita, S. 1999.
Claudin-11/OSP-based tight junctions of myelin sheaths in brain and
Sertoli cells in testis. J. Cell. Biol. 145:579–588.
17. Fanning, A.S., Jameson, B., Jesaitis, L.A., and Anderson, J.M. 1998. The
tight junction protein ZO-1 establishes a link between the transmem-
brane protein occludin and the actin cytoskeleton. J. Biol. Chem.
273:29745–29753.
18. Medina, R., Anderson, J.M., and Van Itallie, C.M. 2000. Occludin local-
ization at the tight junction requires the second extracellular loop. J.
Membr. Biol. 178:235–247.
19. Gorodeski, G.I., Peterson, D.E., DeSantis, B.J., and Hopfer, U. 1996.
Nucleotide receptor-mediated decrease of tight-junctional permeability
in cultured human cervical epithelium. Am. J. Physiol.270:C1715–C1725.
20. Cereijido, M., Robbins, E.S., Dolan, W.J., Rotunno, C.A., and Sabatini,
D.D. 1978. Polarized monolayers formed by epithelial cells on a perme-
able and translucent support. J. Cell. Biol. 77:853–880.
21. Delamere, N.A., and Duncan, G. 1977. A comparison of ion concentra-
tions, potentials and conductances of amphibian, bovine and cephalod
lenses. J. Physiol. 272:167–186.
22. McCarthy, K.M., et al. 1996. Occludin is a functional component of the
1326 The Journal of Clinical Investigation | May 2001 | Volume 107 | Number 10

===== PAGE 9 =====
tight junction. J. Cell. Sci. 109:2287–2298.
23. Sonoda, N., et al. 1999. Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin fragment
removes specific claudins from tight junction strands. Evidence for
direct involvement of claudins in tight junction barrier. J. Cell. Biol.
147:195–204.
24. Stevenson, B.R., Anderson, J.M., Goodenough, D.A., and Mooseker, M.S.
1988. Tight junction structure and ZO-1 content are identical in two
strains of Madin-Darby canine kidney cells which differ in transepithe-
lial resistance. J. Cell. Biol. 107:2401–2408.
25. Diamond, J. 1977. The epithelial junction: bridge, gate and fence. Physi-
ologist. 20:10–18.
26. Rabito, C.A., Tchao, R., Valentich, J., and Leighton, J. 1978. Distribution
and characteristics of the occluding junctions in a monolayer of a cell
line (MDCK) derived from canine kidney. J. Membr. Biol. 43:351–365.
27. Saladik, D.T., Soler, A.P., Lewis, S.A., and Mullin, J.M. 1995. Cell division
does not increase transepithelial permeability of LLC-PK
1 cell sheets.
Exp. Cell. Res. 220:446–455.
28. Van Itallie, C., and Anderson, J.M. 2000. Molecular structure and regu-
lation of tight junctions. In Current topics in membranes. K.E. Barrett and
M. Donowitz, editors. Academic Press. San Diego, California, USA.
163–186.
29. Wittchen, E.S., Haskins, J., and Stevenson, B.R. 1999. Protein interac-
tions at the tight junction. Actin has multiple binding partners, and ZO-
1 forms independent complexes with ZO-2 and ZO-3. J. Biol. Chem.
274:35179–35185.
30. Itoh, M., Nagafuchi, A., Moroi, S., and Tsukita, S. 1997. Involvement of
ZO-1 in cadherin-based adhesion through its direct binding to α catenin
and actin filaments. J. Cell. Biol. 138:181–192.
31. Balda, M.S., et al. 1996. Functional dissociation of paracellular perme-
ability and transepithelial electrical resistance and disruption of the api-
cal-basolateral intramembrane diffusion barrier by expression of a
mutant tight junction membrane protein. J. Cell. Biol. 134:1031–1049.
32. McClane, B.A. 1994. Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin acts by produc-
ing small molecule permeability alterations in plasma membranes. Tox-
icology. 87:43–67.
33. Hasegawa, H., et al. 1999. Opposite regulation of transepithelial electri-
cal resistance and paracellular permeability by Rho in Madin-Darby
canine kidney cells. J. Biol. Chem. 274:20982–20988.
34. Misfeldt, D.S., Hamamoto, S.T., and Pietelka, D.R. 1976. Transepithelial
transport in cell culture. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 73:1212–1216.
35. Marano, C.W., Lewis, S.A., Garulacan, L.A., Soler, A.P., and Mullin, J.M.
1998. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha increases sodium and chloride con-
ductance across the tight junction of CACO-2 BBE, a human intestinal
epithelial cell line. J. Membr. Biol. 161:263–274.
36. Wong, V., and Goodenough, D.A. 1999. Paracellular channels! Science.
285:62.
37. Furuse, M., Sasaki, H., and Tsukita, S. 1999. Manner of interaction of
heterogeneous claudin species within and between tight junction
strands. J. Cell. Biol. 147:891–903.
38. Kubota, K., et al. 1999. Ca(2+)-independent cell-adhesion activity of
claudins, a family of integral membrane proteins localized at tight junc-
tions. Curr. Biol. 9:1035–1038.
The Journal of Clinical Investigation | May 2001 | Volume 107 | Number 10 1327