

===== PAGE 1 =====
CLINICAL CANCER RESEARCH | RESEARCH BRIEFS: PRECISION MEDICINE AND THERAPEUTICS
TROP2 Is Associated with Primary Resistance to Immune
Checkpoint Inhibition in Patients with Advanced
Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer
Alban Bessede 1, Florent Peyraud 2,3,4, Benjamin Besse 5, Sophie Cousin 2, Mathilde Cabart 2,
Fran¸cois Chomy 2, Christophe Rey 1, Oren Lara 1, Oph /C19elie Odin 1, Imane Na ﬁa1, Lucile Vanhersecke 2,
Fabrice Barlesi 5, Jean-Philippe Gu /C19egan1, and Antoine Italiano 2,3,4
ABSTRACT
◥
Purpose: Mechanisms of primary resistance to inhibitors of the
programmed cell death-1 (PD-1)/programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-
L1) signaling axis in non – small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are still
poorly understood. While some studies suggest the involvement of
trophoblast cell surface antigen 2 (TROP2) in modulating tumor
cell resistance to therapeutic drugs, its speciﬁc role in the context of
PD-1/PD-L1 axis blockade is not de ﬁnitively established.
Experimental Design: We performed high-throughput analysis
of transcriptomic data from 891 NSCLC tumors from patients
treated with either the PD-L1 inhibitor atezolizumab or chemo-
therapy in two large randomized clinical trials. To con ﬁrm our
results at the protein level, we complemented this transcriptional
approach by performing a multiplex immuno ﬂuorescence analysis
of tumor tissue samples as well as a proteomic pro ﬁling of plasma.
Results: We observed a signi ﬁcant association of TROP2 over-
expression with worse progression-free survival and overall survival
on PD-L1 blockade, independent of other prognostic factors.
Importantly, we found increased TROP2 expression to be predictive
of survival in patients treated with atezolizumab but not chemo-
therapy. TROP2 overexpression was associated with decreased
T-cell in ﬁltration. We con ﬁrmed these results at the proteomic
level both on tumor tissue and in plasma.
Conclusions: Our results suggest an important contribution of
TROP2 expression to the primary resistance to PD-L1 blockade
in NSCLC. TROP2-biomarker – based strategy may be relevant in
selecting patients with NSCLC who are more likely to bene ﬁt
from a combination of immunotherapy and an anti-TROP2
agent.
Introduction
Despite numerous efforts to decr ease tobacco consumption, lung
cancer remains the leading cause of cancer-related death in Western
countries. A signi ﬁcant portion of patients (80%) diagnosed with
non– small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) have already progressed to an
advanced stage. The advent of mAbs targeting programmed cell
death-1 (PD-1) or its ligand, programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1),
has brought about a revolution ary shift in the management of
advanced NSCLC, with several s tudies demonstrating notable
improvements in objective respons e rate, progression-free survival
(PFS), and overall survival (OS) (1). However, most patients with
advanced NSCLC exhibit primary resistance to PD-1/PD-L1 block-
ade, and the underlying mechanisms responsible for this phenom-
enon are still poorly understood (2).
Trophoblast cell surface antigen 2 (TROP2), also known as tumor-
associated calcium signal transducer 2, is a crucial 36-kDa single-pass
transmembrane protein that exhibits high expression levels in various
epithelial cancers. Although the precise physiologic role of TROP2 is
still being investigated, research has revealed its involvement in
multiple intracellular signaling pathways such as MAPK and
PI3K/AKT. These pathways are closely associated with critical pro-
cesses like cell proliferation, migration, and invasion, which are key
factors in cancer progression (3 – 5).
TROP2 expression has been found in nearly all lung cancer cells,
although the extent of its expression varies, and high expression levels
are only observed in a speci ﬁc subset of cases (6 – 7). Preclinical data
have suggested that TROP2 surface expression in lung cancer cells may
affect the functions of cancer cell – reactive T cells by inducing apo-
ptosis of CD8 þ T cells (8).
To investigate the impact of TROP2 expression on the treatment
outcomes of patients with NSCLC undergoing immunotherapy, we
initially analyzed the largest NSCLC gene expression dataset available
worldwide. This dataset comprises whole-transcriptome pro ﬁles of
891 pretreatment tumors from two randomized studies, the POPLAR
study (phase II; ref. 9) and the OAK study (phase III; ref. 10), which
assessed the safety and ef ﬁcacy of atezolizumab versus the cytotoxic
agent docetaxel as a second-line treatment of NSCLC. To validate our
ﬁndings at the protein level, we complemented this transcriptomic
analysis with multiplex immunohisto ﬂuorescence (mIHF) on tumor
tissue and with proteomic pro ﬁling of plasma.
Materials and Methods
Patient population
Gene expression data were collected from patients included in the
open-label, randomized phase II POPLAR (NCT01903993) and
phase III OAK trials (NCT02008227), which evaluated atezolizumab
versus docetaxel in patients with NSCLC who progressed following
1Explicyte, Bordeaux, France. 2Department of Medicine, Institut Bergoni /C19e, Bor-
deaux, France. 3Faculty of Medicine, Bordeaux, France. 4DITEP, Gustave Roussy,
Villejuif, France. 5Department of Medicine, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
Corresponding Author: Antoine Italiano, Institut Bergoni /C19e, Department of
Medicine, 229 cours de l ’Argonne, Bordeaux 33000, France. E-mail:
a.italiano@bordeaux.unicancer.fr
Clin Cancer Res 2024;30:779 – 85
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-23-2566
This open access article is distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) license.
/C211 2023 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research
AACRJournals.org | 779

===== PAGE 2 =====
platinum-based chemotherapy (9, 10). Participants in both studies
were administered either 1,200 mg of intravenous atezolizumab
every 3 weeks until disease progression or loss of clinical bene ﬁt,
or 75 mg/m 2 of intravenous docetaxel every 3 weeks until progres-
sive disease. Results from the POPLAR and OAK trials demonstrat-
ed a noteworthy enhancement in OS with atezolizumab compared
with docetaxel, regardless of PD-L1 expression. It is noteworthy that
no crossover was permitted, and OS served as the primary endpoint
in these trials (9, 10).
mIHF analysis and plasma proteomic pro ﬁling were performed on
tumor and blood samples from patients included in an institutional
molecular proﬁling program [Bergonie Institute Proﬁling (BIP) study,
sponsor: Institut Bergoni /C19e, Bordeaux, France, NCT02534649]. The
inclusion criteria were age ≥ 18 years, histologic con ﬁrmation of
malignant tumor, unresectable and/or metastatic disease, at least one
tumor evaluation by imaging after initial immunotherapy adminis-
tration, and available paraf ﬁn-embedded tumor material obtained
before initial immunotherapy administration.
Written informed consent was obtained from all patients. The
studies were conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki
and approved by the Institutional Review Board of Institut Bergoni /C19e.
The best response to treatment was evaluated according to
RECIST (11). Durable clinical bene ﬁt (DCB) was de ﬁned as the
proportion of patients achieving objective response or stable disease
lasting ≥ 12 months. PFS was de ﬁned as the time from the start of
treatment until disease progression, death, or last patient contact. OS
was deﬁned as the time from the start of treatment until death or last
patient contact.
RNA sequencing data analysis
FASTQ ﬁles generated during the POPLAR (GO28753) and OAK
(GO28915) clinical trials were downloaded from the European
Genome-Phenome Archive (EGAC00001002120). Raw data were ﬁrst
processed through fastp software (v0.32.2) to remove reads containing
adapters, poly-N sequences, and reads with low quality. Paired-end
clean reads were mapped to the human reference genome (GRCh38 -
Gencode release 39) and counted using STAR software (v2.7.10a).
Differentially expressed genes were tested using the DESeq2 R package
(v1.36.0), and gene signature enrichment analyses were performed
using the fsgea R package (v1.22.0) with Gene Ontology – Biological
Process (GO – BP) terms. Immune cell estimations were performed,
and tertiary lymphoid structure (TLS) signature scores were calculated
by the single-sample gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) framework
using the consensusTME R package (v0.0.1.9) with the Bindea and
colleagues (12) gene set and the Hennequin and colleagues (13) gene
signature, respectively. To assess the PD-L1 status for all the patients
treated with atezolizumab, an optimal cut-off point was de ﬁned to
classify the patients as PD-L1– high (≥ 1%) or PD-L1– low (< 1%) using
the cutpointr R package (v1.1.2), and the maximize metric method was
used for the patients with PD-L1 22C3 measurements. ROC curves and
volcano plots were drawn using the ROCit R package (v2.1.1) and
EnhancedVolcano R package (v1.14.0), respectively.
For patients enrolled in the BIP study, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq)
was performed as previously described (14).
Multiplex immuno ﬂuorescence
Multiplex immuno ﬂuorescence analyses were performed on the
automated Ventana Discovery XT staining platform (Ventana Medical
Systems). In brief, slides of tumor tissue were deparaf ﬁnized, and
antigen retrieval was performed by heat-induced epitope retrieval
using standard CC1 reagent (Tris-based buffer, pH 8.0; Ventana
Medical Systems). The slides were then incubated with primary
antibodies against the following molecules: CD8 (C8/144B, Dako:
Agilent Technologies), PanCK (AE1/AE3/PK26, Ventana), PD-L1
(QR-1, Diagomics) and TROP2 (EPR2043, Abcam).
Bound primary antibodies were detected using OmniMap horse-
radish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (760– 4311; Ven-
tana; Roche) or OmniMap HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG (760 –
4310; Ventana; Roche), followed by tyramide signal ampli ﬁcation
using opal ﬂuorophores (Opal 480, Opal 520, Opal 620, and/or Opal
690; Akoya Biosciences). The slides were counterstained with spectral
40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindol (Akoya Biosciences), cover-slipped,
and digitized using a multispectral imaging platform (PhenoImager
HT, Akoya).
The multispectrally acquired images were unmixed using spectral
libraries previously built from images stained for each ﬂuorophore
(monoplex) and with inForm Advanced Image Analysis software
(inForm v.2.60; Akoya Biosciences). Tumor areas of each tissue slide
were delineated by a pathologist using PhenoChart (Akoya Bios-
ciences), and the annotated sections were analyzed using inForm
software (v.2.6.0). Cells were segmented on the basis of DAPI and
ﬂuorescent membrane signals. Meanﬂuorescent marker intensities for
each cell were extracted, and signal intensities were normalized using
the GaussNorm function from the ﬂowStats R package (v4.8.2). Cells
were ultimately phenotyped using a thresholding method in FlowJo
software (v.10.8.0; FlowJo).
Plasma proteome analysis
Proteome analysis has been carried out as previously described
thanks to the Olink Proximity Extension Assay (PEA; Olink Prote-
omics AB, Uppsala, Sweden; ref. 15). In brief, pairs of oligonucleotide-
labeled antibody probes bind to their targeted protein, and if the two
probes are brought in proximity, the oligonucleotides will hybridize in
a pairwise manner. The addition of a DNA polymerase leads to a
proximity-dependent DNA polymerization event, generating a unique
target sequence analyzed through either next-generation sequencing
or real-time PCR.
Analysis of samples has been carried out using the Olink Explore
1536 library consisting of 1,472 proteins and 48 controls assays
divided into four 384-plex panels focused on in ﬂammation, oncol-
ogy, cardiometabolic, and neuro logy proteins. Sequencing was
carried out on a NovaSeq 6000 system using two S1 ﬂow cells
with 2 /C2 50 base read lengths. Counts of known sequences are
thereafter translated into normalized protein expression (NPX)
units through a quality control and normalization process devel-
oped and provided by Olink.
Translational Relevance
A signiﬁcant subgroup of non – small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
cases fails to respond to immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICI).
Trophoblast cell surface antigen 2 (TROP2) is a transmembrane
glycoprotein that is overexpressed in NSCLC and represents a
target for antibody – drug conjugates. Overexpression of TROP2
has been shown to promote tumor cell proliferation, survival, and
metastasis. We have demonstrated that TROP2 overexpression is
associated with primary resistance to ICI but not to chemotherapy
in patients with advanced NSCLC. These ﬁndings suggest that
patients with NSCLC with TROP2-overexpressing tumors may
beneﬁt from strategy combining ICI with anti-TROP2 agents.
Bessede et al.
Clin Cancer Res; 30(4) February 15, 2024 CLINICAL CANCER RESEARCH780

===== PAGE 3 =====
Data were quality controlled and normalized using an internal
extension control and an inter-plate control, to adjust for intra- and
inter-run variation. The ﬁnal assay readout is presented in NPX values,
which is an arbitrary unit on a log 2-scale where a high value corre-
sponds to a higher protein expression. All assay validation data
(detection limits, intra- and inter-assay precision data, etc.) are
available on the manufacturer ’s website (www.olink.com).
Survival and statistical analyses
The Wilcoxon and x2 tests were used in instances where they were
deemed appropriate. For survival analyses, the log-rank test was used
to compare Kaplan‒Meier survival curves (survival R package v3.3.1).
The Cox proportional hazards regression model was used to estimate
HR and 95% con ﬁdence intervals (CI). Patients were classi ﬁed as
TROP2-high or TROP2-low based on an optimized threshold
obtained using the maximally selected rank statistics from the maxstat
R package and using PFS as the optimal outcome (survminer R package
v0.4.9). Multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression models
were used to compare the interdependence of distinct biomarkers
for the prediction of immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) bene ﬁt
(survivalAnalysis R package v0.3.0). All analyses were conducted
using R v.4.2.1.
Availability of data and material
Raw and processed transcriptomic data and limited clinical data
have been deposited at the European Genome-phenome Archive
(EGA), which is hosted by the EBI and the CRG, under accession
number EGA: EGAS00001005013. Additional clinical data are avail-
able via request from https://vivli.org/ourmember/roche/. The immu-
noﬂuorescence datasets are not publicly available due to information
that could compromise research participant consent. According to
French/European regulations, any reuse of the data must be approved
by the ethics committee. Each request for access to the immuno ﬂu-
orescence dataset (including the images) will be granted after a request
is sent to the corresponding author (A. Italiano) and approval by the
ethics committee.
Results
TROP2 gene expression is independently associated with
unfavorable outcome in patients treated with atezolizumab but
not with chemotherapy
We ﬁrst investigated the impact of the TROP2-encoding gene
(TACSTD2) expression on the PFS of patients treated with atezoli-
zumab ( n ¼ 405). The clinical characteristics of these patients are
summarized in Supplementary Table S1. As shown in Fig. 1A, the PFS
of patients with high expression of TACSTD2 was signiﬁcantly lower
than that of patients with low expression (median PFS, 2.5 vs.
4.1 months; P < 0.001). Strikingly, high TACSTD2 expression was
also associated with worse OS (median OS, 12.6 vs. 16.3 months; P ¼
0.007; Fig. 1B ) and a lower DCB rate (15.7% vs. 26.2%; P ¼
0.009; Fig. 1C ). None of these correlations were observed in the
docetaxel arm (Fig. 1D– F), suggesting a predictive value of TACSTD2
gene expression speci ﬁcally for response to atezolizumab. Other
factors associated with PFS and OS in patients treated with atezoli-
zumab in the univariate analysis were histologic subtype, CD274 gene
expression, and increased TLS signatures. On multivariate analysis,
high TACSTD2 expression remained independently associated with
worse PFS (Supplementary Table S2, Supplementary Fig. S1).
GO– BP enrichment analysis revealed that several immune path-
ways, such as the B-cell receptor and immune response – regulating
pathways, were enriched in the group with low expression of
TACSTD2 (Fig. 1G and H). By using a deconvolution approach, we
also found that the tumor microenvironment (TME) composition
differed signi ﬁcantly between TACSTD2-high and TACSTD2-low
tumors. TACSTD2-low tumors were characterized by the highest
expression of genes speci ﬁc to immune cell populations such as T
follicular helper (Tfh) cells, T cells and cytotoxic lymphocytes and B
cells ( Fig. 1I and J). Analysis of an independent set of 72 NSCLC
tumors, treated with ICI and incorporated into the Bergoni /C19e
Institute Pro ﬁling program (BIP, NCT02534649), echoed our ﬁnd-
ings, further solidifying the as sociation between TROP2 gene
expression and poor response to ICI (Supplementary Fig. S2 and
Supplementary Table S3).
TROP2 intracellular expression is associated with worse
outcome in patients treated with ICI
To validate our ﬁndings at the protein level, we supplemented our
transcriptional study by conducting mIHF analysis using a 5-plex color
panel. This panel combined the markers PanCK, TROP2, CD8, PD-L1,
and DAPI. We applied this analysis to a subset of 50 patients for whom
parafﬁn-embedded material was available ( Fig. 2A ). The character-
istics of these patients are presented in Supplementary Table S4.
TROP2 is known to be cleaved in two products: the extracellular
domain (ECD) and the intracellular domain (ICD; ref. 16). The ECD is
shed and found only on the plasma membrane and in the cytoplasm.
The ICD, which is the functionally dominant part of TROP2, is
released from the membrane and accumulates in the nucleus where
it promotes tumorigenesis. Although the total or membrane level of
TROP2 expression was not associated with outcome ( Fig. 2B– D), the
intracellular expression was signi ﬁcantly associated with worse PFS
(median 1.4 vs. 13.4 months; P ¼ 0.038; Fig. 2E), OS (median 6.9 vs.
30.7 months; P ¼ 0.226; Fig. 2F ) and DCB rate (16.7% vs. 60.5%;
P ¼ 0.008; Fig. 2G ).
Circulating TROP2 levels are associated with worse outcome in
patients treated with ICI
To con ﬁrm the importance of TROP2 cleavage in the prediction
of ICI response, we aimed to investigate the predictive value of
circulating TROP2 levels in patients with NSCLC undergoing
immunotherapy. To achieve this, we employed proteomics analysis
using PEA technology (see Methods) on plasma samples collected
from 74 patients with advanced NSCLC and enrolled prospectively
in the BIP study (Supplementary Table S4). First, our ﬁndings
demonstrate a signi ﬁcant correlation between circulating TROP2
levels and TROP2 gene expression in tumor tissue (Supplementary
Fig. S2A). Interestingly, when classifying TROP2 circulating levels
as high or low, we observed a signi ﬁcant correlation with DCB
rate (17.5% vs. 52.9%; P ¼ 0.003; Supplementary Fig. S2B), PFS
(median 2.4 vs. 10.9 months; P ¼ 0.003; Supplementary Fig. S2C),
and OS (median 8.5 vs. 24.6 months; P ¼ 0.045; Supplementary
Fig. S2D). In addition, we conducted an in-depth analysis of the
tumor’s transcriptomic pro ﬁle based on the peripheral TROP2
status (low vs. high; Supplementary Fig. S2E). Through GSEA, we
identi ﬁed the MEK signaling pathway as signi ﬁcantly induced in
circulating TROP2-high patients. This ﬁnding strongly suggests
a correlation between TROP2 cleavage and MEK activation, which
is supported by existing literature evidence (ref. 17; Supplemen-
tary Fig. S2F). Moreover, our observations revealed that a high
level of circulating TROP2 was associated with a reduction in
gamma delta T cells and Th1 cells within the TME (Supplemen-
tary Fig. S2G).
TROP2 and Resistance to Immunotherapy
AACRJournals.org Clin Cancer Res; 30(4) February 15, 2024 781

===== PAGE 4 =====
Figure 1.
High TACSTD2 gene expression correlates with poorer response to ICI. Patients from the POPLAR and OAK studies were classi ﬁed as high or low based on their
baseline level of TACSTD2 gene expression as assessed by RNA-seq. Kaplan – Meier curves of the PFS ( A– D) and OS ( B– E) of patients treated with atezolizumab
(A and B) or docetaxel ( D and E). C– F, Proportion of patients treated with atezolizumab ( C) or docetaxel ( F) with high and low expression of TACSTD2 who
experienced DCB or nondurable clinical bene ﬁt (NDB). P values were calculated using a x2 test. G, Volcano plot representation of the gene differentially expressed
between TACSTD2-high and TACSTD2-low patients. H, GO analysis of the gene differentially expressed between TACSTD2-high and TACSTD2-low patients.
I, Estimation of the immune microenvironment of patients with high and low TCASTD2 gene expression by data deconvolution using Bindea and colleagues gene sets.
J, Histograms of the estimated score of Tfh, T cells, and cytotoxic cells in TACSTD2-high and TACSTD2-low patients.P values were calculated using the Wilcoxon test.
Bessede et al.
Clin Cancer Res; 30(4) February 15, 2024 CLINICAL CANCER RESEARCH782

===== PAGE 5 =====
Discussion
Prospectively designed clinical trials are considered as the gold-
standard approach for validating predictive markers. However,
conducting prospective trials can be time-consuming and expensive.
As an alternative, using data from previously well-conducted ran-
domized controlled trials that compared therapies for which a
marker is proposed to be predictive can offer a more feasible and
timely option to test the predictive ability of a marker. In this study,
Figure 2.
TROP2 nuclear activity is associated with
poor response to immunotherapy in
NSCLC cancer patients.A, Representative
image ﬁeld CD8/PanCK/PD-L1/TROP2/
DAPI mIHF panel on a lung adenocarcino-
ma section. B, Histogram of the level of
TROP2 expression in patients treated with
immunotherapy who experienced DCB or
nondurable clinical beneﬁt( N D B ) .P value
was calculated using the Wilcoxon test.
C, TROP2 expression pattern in patients
with NSCLC. A clear membrane staining
(top) can be distinguished from more
diffuse staining (bottom), with nuclear
localization.D and E, Kaplan– Meier curves
of the PFS of patients strati ﬁed as high
versus low membrane TROP2-positive
tumors (D) or high versus low intracellular
TROP2-positive tumors ( E). F, Kaplan–
Meier curves of the OS of patients with
high versus low intracellular TROP2-posi-
tive tumors.G, Proportion of patients with
high versus low intracellular TROP2-posi-
tive tumors who experienced DCB or non-
durable clinical bene ﬁt( N D B ) .P value
was calculated using the c2 test.
TROP2 and Resistance to Immunotherapy
AACRJournals.org Clin Cancer Res; 30(4) February 15, 2024 783

===== PAGE 6 =====
we used data from two large prospective studies that investigated
the ef ﬁcacy of immunotherapy (atezo lizumab) versus chemother-
apy (docetaxel) in patients with advanced NSCLC to examine the
predictive role of TROP2 gene expression for immunotherapy
efﬁcacy. Our ﬁndings indicate that high TROP2 gene expression
is associated with worse outcomes in patients with NSCLC treated
with immunotherapy but not with c hemotherapy. This suggests that
TROP2 expression is not prognostic per se but rather predictive of
immunotherapy resistance. This statement aligns with previous
studies that have found no signi ﬁcant prognostic impact of TROP2
expression in NSCLC (6). It is also consistent with ﬁndings from
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) study, showing no signi ﬁcant
impact of TROP2 gene expression on survival in patients with
resected NSCLC (TCGA data accessed at http://gepia.cancer-pku.
cn/ on June 2, 2023).
Recent studies have highlighted a correlation between TROP2
expression and the TME (18). In our study, we observed that
TROP2 overexpression in NSCLC was linked to decreased levels
of T-cell in ﬁltration. Although preclinical studies have indicated a
potential role of TROP2 in inducing T-cell apoptosis (8), the precise
mechanisms involved in the poten tial immunoregulatory role of
TROP2 are yet to be fully understood and elucidated. Moreover, it
would be interesting to explore in subsequent studies the potential
role of TROP2 in mediating primary resistance to the combination
of PD-1 inhibition and platinum-based chemotherapy, the current
ﬁrst-line standard of care. Under standing the subtleties of this
interaction, especially when cons idering PD-L1 versus PD-1 target-
ing, is essential to enhance therapeutic strategies. Given the signif-
icant role of TROP2 in cell proliferation and transformation, as well
as its overexpression in many epith elial solid tumors compared with
normal tissue, several anti-TRO P2 agents have entered clinical
development. Speci ﬁcally, several antibody – drug conjugates (ADC)
have been designed to combine the targeting ability of mAbs with
the cell-damaging effects of poten t cytotoxic agents (19). In 2020,
sacituzumab govitecan, an ADC t argeting TROP2, became the ﬁrst
FDA-approved anti-TROP2 agent f or the treatment of unresectable
locally advanced or metastatic triple-negative breast cancer in
patients refractory to previous systemic therapies (20). This drug
is also now approved for patients with advanced metastatic hor-
mone receptor (HR)-positive, HER 2-negative breast cancer and
advanced urothelial cancer.
Spira and colleagues reported the results of the NSCLC cohorts in
the phase I TROPION-PanTumor01 trial, which investigated the
safety and ef ﬁcacy of another TROP2-directed ADC called datopo-
tamab deruxtecan in patients with advanced solid tumors (21). One
hundred seventy- ﬁve patients with advanced NSCLC were enrolled
in the study. Eighty-four percent previously received immunother-
apy, and 94% received platinum-based chemotherapy. Datopotamab
deruxtecan demonstrated preliminary signals of activity with a
manageable safety pro ﬁle. More recently, the preliminary analysis
of the TROPION-Lung02 trial, which investigated the combination
of datopotamab deruxtecan and pembrolizumab in 47 patients with
advanced NSCLC, revealed an objective response rate of 38% (95%
CI, 25%– 54%) and a median PFS of 10.8 months (95% CI, 8.3 – 15.2;
ref. 22). Although these results were encouraging, our data suggest
that a TROP2-biomarker-based strategy may be relevant in selecting
patients with NSCLC who are more likely to bene ﬁt from a com-
bination of immunotherapy and an anti-TROP2 agent. Given the
observed correlation between TROP2 circulating levels, expression
in tumor tissue, and patient outcomes, implementing a biomarker-
driven strategy may also allow for noninvasive testing through a
blood assay.
Ethical approval
This study was approved by the IRB of Institut Bergoni/C19e. All patients
provided written informed consent.
Authors’ Disclosures
A. Bessede reports other support from Explicyte during the conduct of the study.
B. Besse reports grants from AbbVie, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Chugai Pharmaceutical,
Daiichi-Sankyo, Ellipse Pharma, Eisai, Genmab, Genzyme Corporation, Hedera Dx,
Inivata, Ipsen, Janssen, MSD, PharmaMar, Roche-Genentech, Sano ﬁ, SOCAR
Research, Tahio Oncology, and Turning during the conduct of the study. C. Rey
reports other support from Explicyte during the conduct of the study. O. Lara reports
other support from ImmuSmol during the conduct of the study. O. Odin reports other
support from Exlicyte during the conduct of the study. F. Barlesi reports other support
from AbbVie, ACEA, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Eisai, Eli Lilly Oncology, F. Hoffmann – La Roche Ltd., Genentech, Ipsen,
Ignyta, Innate Pharma, Loxo, Novartis, Medimmune, Merck, MSD, Pierre Fabre,
Pﬁzer, Sano ﬁ-Aventis, and Takeda outside the submitted work. J.P. Gu /C19egan is an
employee of Explicyte. A. Italiano reports grants and personal fees from AstraZeneca,
Bayer, Parthenon, and BMS; grants from MSD and Merck; personal fees from Lilly;
and grants and personal fees from Transgene outside the submitted work. No
disclosures were reported by the other authors.
Authors’ Contributions
A. Bessede: Conceptualization, resources, supervision, funding acquisition, val-
idation, investigation, methodology, writing – review and editing. F. Peyraud: Inves-
tigation, writing – review and editing. B. Besse: Investigation, writing – review and
editing. S. Cousin: Investigation, writing– review and editing. M. Cabart: Investiga-
tion, writing – review and editing. F. Chomy: Investigation, writing – review and
editing. C. Rey: Data curation, investigation, methodology, writing – review and
editing. O. Lara: Validation, investigation, writing – review and editing. O. Odin:
Validation, investigation, writing – review and editing. I. Na ﬁa: Validation, investi-
gation, writing – review and editing. L. Vanhersecke: Validation, investigation,
writing– review and editing. F. Barlesi: Investigation, writing – review and editing.
J.-P. Gu /C19egan: Data curation, formal analysis, validation, investigation, writing –
original draft, writing– review and editing. A. Italiano: Conceptualization, resources,
formal analysis, supervision, funding acquisition, writing – original draft, writing –
review and editing.
Acknowledgments
Funding was provided by Conseil Regional Aquitaine (BIP AIRIC).
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of
publication fees. Therefore, and solely to indicate this fact, this article is hereby
marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 USC section 1734.
Note
Supplementary data for this article are available at Clinical Cancer Research Online
(http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Received August 23, 2023; revised October 7, 2023; accepted November 29, 2023;
published ﬁrst December 4, 2023.
References
1. Shields MD, Marin-Acevedo JA, Pellini B. Immunotherapy for advanced non –
small cell lung cancer: a decade of progress. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book 2021;
41:1– 23.
2. Camidge DR, Doebele RC, Kerr KM. Comparing and contrasting predictive
biomarkers for immunotherapy and targeted therapy of NSCLC. Nat Rev Clin
Oncol 2019;16:341 – 55.
Bessede et al.
Clin Cancer Res; 30(4) February 15, 2024 CLINICAL CANCER RESEARCH784

===== PAGE 7 =====
3. Cubas R, Zhang S, Li M, Chen C, Yao Q. Trop2 expression contributes to tumor
pathogenesis by activating the ERK MAPK pathway. Mol Cancer 2010;9:253.
4. Guan H, Guo Z, Liang W, Li H, Wei G, Xu L, et al. Trop2 enhances invasion of
thyroid cancer by inducing MMP2 through ERK and JNK pathways.
BMC Cancer 2017;17:486.
5. Guerra E, Trerotola M, Tripaldi R, Aloisi AL, Simeone P, Sacchetti A, et al. Trop-
2 induces tumor growth through AKT and determines sensitivity to AKT
inhibitors. Clin Cancer Res 2016;22:4197 – 205.
6. Mito R, Matsubara E, Komohara Y, Shinchi Y, Sato K, Yoshii D, et al. Clinical
impact of TROP2 in non – small lung cancers and its correlation with abnormal
p53 nuclear accumulation. Pathol Int 2020;70:287 – 94.
7. Inamura K, Yokouchi Y, Kobayashi M, Ninomiya H, Sakakibara R, Subat S, et al.
Association of tumor TROP2 expression with prognosis varies among lung
cancer subtypes. Oncotarget 2017 Apr 25;8:28725 – 35.
8. Wang X, Long M, Dong K, Lin F, Weng Y, Ouyang Y, et al. Chemotherapy
agents-induced immunoresistance in lung cancer cells could be reversed by trop-
2 inhibition in vitro and in vivo by interaction with MAPK signaling pathway.
Cancer Biol Ther 2013;14:1123 – 32.
9. Fehrenbacher L, Spira A, Ballinger M, Kowanetz M, Vansteenkiste J, Mazieres J,
et al. Atezolizumab versus docetaxel for patients with previously treated non –
small cell lung cancer (POPLAR): a multicenter, open-label, phase II randomized
controlled trial. Lancet 2016;387:1837 – 46.
10. Rittmeyer A, Barlesi F, Waterkamp D, Park K, Ciardiello F, von Pawel J, et al.
OAK Study Group. Atezolizumab versus docetaxel in patients with previously
treated non– small cell lung cancer (OAK): a phase III, open-label, multicenter
randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2017;389:255 – 65.
11. Eisenhauer EA, Therasse P, Bogaerts J, Schwartz LH, Sargent D, Ford R, et al.
New response evaluation criteria in solid tumors: revised RECIST guideline
(version 1.1). Eur J Cancer 2009;45:228 – 47.
12. Bindea G, Mlecnik B, Tosolini M, Kirilovsky A, Waldner M, Obenauf AC, et al.
Spatiotemporal dynamics of intratumoral immune cells reveal the immune
landscape in human cancer. Immunity 2013;39:782 – 95.
13. Hennequin A, Derang /C18ere V, Boidot R, Apetoh L, Vincent J, Orry D, et al. Tumor
inﬁltration by Tbetþ effector T cells and CD20þ B cells is associated with survival
in gastric cancer patients. Oncoimmunology 2015;5:e1054598.
14. Massard C, Michiels S, Fert /C19e C, Le Deley MC, Lacroix L, Hollebecque A, et al.
High-throughput genomics and clinical outcome in hard-to-treat advanced
cancers: results of the MOSCATO 01 trial. Cancer Discov 2017;7:586 – 95.
15. Filbin MR, Mehta A, Schneider AM, Kays KR, Guess JR, Gentili M, et al. Plasma
proteomics reveals tissue-speci ﬁc cell death and mediators of cell-cell interac-
tions in severe COVID-19 patients. Biorxiv 2020.
16. Stoyanova T, Goldstein AS, Cai H, Drake JM, Huang J, Witte ON. Regulated
proteolysis of Trop2 drives epithelial hyperplasia and stem cell self-renewal via
b-catenin signaling. Genes Dev 2012;26:2271 – 85.
17. Guerra E, Trerotola M, Relli V, Lattanzio R, Tripaldi R, Vacca G, et al. Trop-2
induces ADAM10-mediated cleavage of E-cadherin and drives EMT-less metas-
tasis in colon cancer. Neoplasia 2021;23:898 – 911.
18. Trabolsi A, Kareff SA, Rodriguez E, Krause HB, Tan H, Morgenstern-Kaplan D,
et al. The genomic, transcriptomic, and immunological landscape of TROP2 in
solid tumors. J Clin Oncol 2023;41:3118.
19. Parisi C, Mahjoubi L, Gazzah A, Barlesi F. TROP-2 directed antibody – drug
conjugates (ADCs): The revolution of smart drug delivery in advanced non –
small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Cancer Treat Rev 2023;118:102572.
20. Bardia A, Mayer IA, Vahdat LT, Tolaney SM, Isakoff SJ, Diamond JR, et al.
Sacituzumab govitecan-hziy in refractory metastatic triple-negative breast can-
cer. N Engl J Med 2019;380:741 – 51.
21. Spira A, Lisberg A, Sands J, Greenberg J, Philips P, Guevara F, et al. OA03.03
datopotamab deruxtecan (Dato-DXd; DS-1062), a TROP2 ADC, in patients with
advanced NSCLC: updated results of TROPION-PanTumor01 phase I study.
J Thorac Oncology 2021;3:S106 – 7.
22. Goto Y, Su WC, Levy BP, Rixe O, Yang TY, Tolcher AW, et al. TROPION-
Lung02: Datopotamab deruxtecan (Dato-DXd) plus pembrolizumab (pembro)
with or without platinum chemotherapy (Pt-CT) in advanced non – small cell
lung cancer (aNSCLC). J Clin Oncol 2023;41:9004.
AACRJournals.org Clin Cancer Res; 30(4) February 15, 2024 785
TROP2 and Resistance to Immunotherapy